---
layout: post
title:  "Context Free Gramma"
date:   2025-12-30 15:47:29 +0800
categories: jekyll update
---
# Contex-free grammar
A context-free grammar is a way of representing languages using variables together with rules for
how those variables can be converted into alphabet symbols.

One motivation for it comes from linguistics(or from 
programming languages), as you might infer from the name "grammar".The idea is that in linguistic,you 
might have variables like S denoting a sentence,N denoting a noun,V denoting a verb,and A denoting an adjective,together with ruls for how a sentence might
decompose into these constituent parts of speech.
For examle,you might have a rule $$S\rightarrow NV$$
to denote that a sentence wight decompose into a noun 
followed by a verb.You could have antoher ruls line $$S\rightarrow ANV$$ to denote that a sentence might instead decompose into an adjective,noun,verb sequence.
You could then alos have rules that alow a variables A,N and V to turn into real words:for example,$$N\rightarrow<John>$$ mieght be a rule.

Such collections of variable and rules are called "context-free grammas". They are sometimes used in linguistics as well as programming languages, where
one needs to formally define the synmatx of a language.

In this course,our context-free grammasrs(CFGs) might look something like this 
\begin{equation}
S \rightarrow XY
X \rightarrow 0X1
Y \rightarrow 2Y
X \rightarrow \epsilon
Y \rightarrow 3
\end{equation}
The interpretation of this will be as follows. The capital letters S,X,and Y are called variables.One
variable,usually denoted S is spetial: it is called the start variable.The expression sush as $$X\rightarrow 0X1$$ are called rules,and tell us how
we are allowed to turn the variable on the left (in this case X) into a new string of varialbes and alphabets symbols.To generate a string from a context-free grammar,we start with the start varialbe S,and use any number of rules(in any order) to replace the variables with other strings,until we get a tring that has only alphabet symbols and no varailbes;such a string is said to be generated by the contex-free grammar.
# PushDown Automata


[jekyll-gh]:   https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
[jekyll-talk]: https://talk.jekyllrb.com/
