---
layout: post
title:  "Cumulant And Cumulant Decomposition"
date:   2025-05-28 16:28:29 +0800
categories: jekyll update
---

## Background
Here we want to demostate the decomposite of three body operator into two body operator by cumulant decomposition.The reference paper is 

J. Chem. Phys. 127, 104107 (2007)
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2761870

##  Main result
the main result is  equation \#(7) 

$$
a_{stu}^{pqr}\implies 9(\gamma^p_s \wedge a^{qr}_{ut}) -12 (\gamma^p_s \wedge \gamma^q_t \wedge \gamma^r_u)
$$

The notation $$a_{stu}^{pqr}$$ is operator ,$$\gamma$$ is reduced density matrix , but how does $$\wedge$$ and the coefficent 9 and -12 comes from ?
## Relation between RDM and Cumulant

The answer comes from equation \#(8-10)
$$
\gamma^p_s=\lambda^p_s \\
\gamma^{pq}_{st}=\lambda^{pq}_{st} + (\lambda^p_s \lambda^q_t -\lambda^p_t\lambda^q_s) \\
\gamma^{pqr}_{stu}=\lambda^{pqr}_{stu}+(\lambda^p_s\lambda^{qr}_{tu}+\cdots)+(\lambda^p_s \lambda^q_t \lambda^r_u+\cdots)
$$

The question now is why  this relation is true ? The answer is that the quantity $$\lambda$$ which is named kumulant is defined to be make this relationship true.
## Cumulant by axioms

J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020, 16, 10, 6150–6164
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00422

cumulant definition by three axioms
 1. Fuctional Axioms $$
\lambda=\sum_\rho \mu_\rho \gamma(\rho) 
$$
Here the $$\rho$$ is fermionic partition and $$\mu_\rho$$ is Mobius function .
 2. Normalization $$
\mu^{pq\cdots}_{rs\cdots}=1
$$

 3. Additiv Separability

If RDM $$\gamma^{pq\cdots}_{rs\cdots}$$ is multiplicatively seperable,then $$\lambda^{pq\cdots}_{rs\cdots}$$ is additivly seperable.
###  Additive Separability from Multiplicative Separability
The key object we consider are antisymmetic tensros with n uppder index and n lower index.

Suppose the index can be partitioned into subsets, called blocks
$$
p,q,r,s 
$$
in one block $$u,v$$ in another block.

If the antisymmetry tensor satisfing the following relationship ,we call this tensor is multiplicative separable with respect to the partition.

$$
A_{pur}^{qsv}=-A_{pru}^{qsv}=-A_{pr}^{qs}A_{u}^{v}
$$

Additive separability means that the tensor for the symtem with orbitals from all blocks of the partion is the sum of tensors with orbitals from only as singel block of partition 

$$
A_{pur}^{qsv}=-A_{pru}^{qsv}=-(A_{pr}^{qs}+A_{u}^{v})
$$
### Manually construct
Let $$\gamma_{pr}^{qs}$$ be multiplicative separable.


Then  define
$$
\lambda_{pr}^{qs}\equiv \gamma_{pr}^{qs}-\gamma_p^q\gamma_r^s+\gamma_p^s\gamma_r^q
$$

If Index $$p,q$$ is in one block ,and $$r,s$$ in another block,then $$\gamma_p^s=\gamma_r^q=0$$,
$$
\lambda_{pr}^{qs}=\gamma_{pr}^{qs}-\gamma_p^q\gamma_r^s+0=0
$$

Similaly,if index $$p,r$$ is in one block ,and $$q,s$$ in another block,then $$\gamma_p^q=\gamma_r^s=0$$,
$$
\lambda_{pr}^{qs}=-\gamma_{pr}^{sq}-0+\gamma_p^q\gamma_r^s =0
$$
### Fermionic Partition

Fermionic Partition is normal partition plus all unique term generated by permutation operator.
The begining relationship is equation \#(18) in jctc paper metioned above

$$
\gamma^{pq\cdots}_{rs\cdots}=\sum_\rho \lambda(\rho)
$$
Here we will generate the diagram 

Due to time limitationn ,I will rewrite this post laterly.


[jekyll-gh]:   https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
[jekyll-talk]: https://talk.jekyllrb.com/
